Create Posts “encoding-in-mei-hannahs-skotshne” (#44)
klezmer-archive/klezmer-archive-blog: content/posts/encoding-in-mei-hannahs-skotshne.md

---
title: "Encoding in MEI: \"Hannah's Skotshne\""
date: 2025-06-02T16:39:54.646Z
authors:
  - Clara Byom
description: "Encoding annotations, different readings, and more! (You don't
  need to code to understand this blog post!) "
tags:
  - MEI
categories:
  - Klezmer
---
# Manuscript to Encoding

Ah, our beloved "Hannah's Skotshne" (KMDMP 20-59-1676).

By now, many of you have heard the tale of this tune that has swept around the globe since the launch of the Kiselgof-Makonovetsky Digital Manuscript Project (KMDMP). The original manuscript captured in the photo is torn, folded, and worn to the point of illegibility. 

**Image 1: Facsimile of the "Hannah's Skotshne" Manuscript**

![Image 1: Facsimile of the "Hannah's Skotshne" Manuscript](/images/uploads/kmdmp-20-59-1676-edited.png)

Nevertheless, KMDMP digitizer extraordinaire Hannah Ochner tackled this piece, providing us with a legible version of the tune from the bits of writing peeking out from the folds and context throughout the tune. When Hannah was done, she submitted her MusicXML file for us to reference as we move into the editorial phase of encoding using MEI. 

> MEI is a XML specification (a version of the musicXML produced by music notation programs) developed by the Music Encoding Initiative used widely for digitally encoding music in academic and archival projects with similar goals to the Klezmer Archive. The schema is developed in the open and the project leaders welcome changes from the community. Indeed, we have already contributed a few small changes that have been accepted and will be included in future releases. The community also has built a suite of tools that we are excited to use, including the Verovio renderer and MEI-friend editor.

Reviewer: To me, as written it sounds like you're saying that MEI is a version of MusicXML, which is not correct.
```suggestion
MEI is an XML specification (similar to MusicXML, which is produced by music notation programs) developed by the Music Encoding Initiative used widely for digitally encoding music in academic and archival projects with similar goals to the Klezmer Archive. The schema is developed in the open and the project leaders welcome changes from the community. Indeed, we have already contributed a few small changes that have been accepted and will be included in future releases. The community also has built a suite of tools that we are excited to use, including the Verovio renderer and MEI-friend editor.
```

# Challenge #1: The Key Signature

Most notation softwares allow us to create our own key signatures, including the one found on the manuscript with B-flat, E-flat, and C-sharp. What is tricky to document in this instance is the presence of two "hands" that created this key signature and the implications for every instance of the C-sharp throughout the remainder of the code. 

The individual who wrote this tune down in the alter klezmer-heft (old klezmer notebook) has written it fully with just a B-flat and E-flat in the key signature, marking the C's throughout the tune with an accidental. The purple C-sharp matches the writing implement that marks the K-numbers throughout the manuscript, likely Moishe Beregovski, to whom the catalog in Yiddish is attributed.

**Image 2: Modal key signature on the "Hannah's Skotshne" manuscript**

> ![Image 2: Modal key signature on the "Hannah's Skotshne" manuscript](/images/uploads/screen-shot-2025-05-15-at-5.06.28-pm.png)

Reviewer: If possible, let's do this as a code block. If you want to hide it I'll help you add an accordion or something, but I'm not sure that'll be necessary

For those of you interested, here is the current code for the key signature!

**Image 5: MEI Code for the Key Signature in "Hannah's Skotshne"**

![Image 5: MEI Code for the Key Signature in "Hannah's Skotshne"](/images/uploads/screenshot-2025-06-02-at-3.44.25 pm.png)

# Challenge #2: The Grace Note in Measure 3

As you can see in the third measure of Images 3 and 4, one C in the original hand that did NOT have a written out sharp next to it - the grace note in measure 3. What do we make of this? Did the original writer forget a C-sharp? Did he intend to leave it a C-natural? Since there is no definite indicator, we leave it as is for the manuscript version and use our best klezmer-informed knowledge to make a decision for the "playable" version. As you can see, we are suggesting that grace note be played as a C-natural and (not visible in the screenshot) have included an annotation to read:

*"The original key signature of this tune had two flats, but a later hand (presumably Beregovski) added the C-sharp to reflect the klezmer mode of G misheberakh. This note has no accidental in the manuscript. The editors recommend playing this as a C-natural."*

> Capturing annotations and editorial commentary not only in the general music file, but linked to specific notes, bars, barlines, or other music symbols allows future scholars and musicians to understand our entire editorial process; and, encoding the music and annotations together in a single file reduces the likelihood that "text" and "context" become separated in the future.

Reviewer: Minor streamlining
```suggestion
Capturing annotations and editorial commentary not only in the general music file, but linked to specific notes, bars, barlines, or other music symbols allows future scholars and musicians to understand our entire editorial process, and encoding the music and annotations together in a single file reduces the likelihood that "text" and "context" become separated in the future.
```
